# Learn You Some Erlang for Great Good!

[Learn You Some Erlang for Great Good! - Fred Hébert](https://learnyousomeerlang.com/content)

## Introduction

Erlang uses the actor model,and each actor is a separate process in the virtual machine. In a nutshell, ifyou were an actor in Erlang’s world, you would be a lonely person, sitting ina dark room with no window, waiting by your mailbox to get a message.Once you got a message, you would react to it in a specific way: You pay thebills, you respond to birthday cards with a “thank you” letter, and you ignorethe letters you can’t understand.

Erlang’s actor model can be imagined as aworld where everyone is sitting alone in a roomand can perform a few distinct tasks. Everyonecommunicates strictly by writing letters, andthat’s it. While it sounds like a boring life (and anew age for the postal service), it means you canask many people to perform very specific tasksfor you, and none of them will ever do somethingwrong or make mistakes that will have repercussions on the work of others.They may not even know of the existence of people other than you (andthat’s great).

It will shine at things like large software for server use (for example, queue middleware, web servers, real-time bidding and dis-tributed database implementations)

## 1. Starting Out

### Using the Erlang Shell

`help().` for help

Ctrl+G (`^G`) for User Switch, giving actions:

```
c [nn]            - connect to job
i [nn]            - interrupt job
k [nn]            - kill job
j                 - list all jobs
s [shell]         - start local shell
r [node [shell]]  - start remote shell
q                 - quit erlang
? | h             - this message
```

Not giving an `nn` results in action applying to last shell (the one marked with `*`)

### Some Erlang Basics

#### Numbers

Division is floating by default. Integer division is done with:

```
> 5 div 2.
2
> 5 rem 2.
1
```

#### Invariable Variables

Variables start with Uppercase.

The `=` operator compares if two values are equal. Errors otherwise. If the value on the left is unbounded, it will bind it.

```
Eshell V13.2.2.5  (abort with ^G)
1> Two = 2.
2
2> Two = 1+1.
2
3> Three = Two + 1.
3
4> Three = Two.
** exception error: no match of right hand side value 2
```

The command `f(Variable)` clears the `Variable` name in the shell for ease of testing. `f()`clears all names.

#### Atoms

Atoms are literals (constants whose only value is its name)

```
1> atom.
atom
2> atoms_rule.
atoms_rule
3> atoms_rule@erlang.
atoms_rule@erlang
4> 'Atoms can be cheated!'.
'Atoms can be cheated!'
5> atom = 'atom'
.atom
```

Atoms should be generated by the developer, not the user, as they are not garbage collected. Open dynamic generation can lead to systems vulnerable to crashing.

#### Comparison Operators

The `and` and `or` operators don't perform lazy evaluation. For their lazy counterparts, use `andalso` or `orelse`.

Equality operators:

- `=:=`: Exact equality (value and type). For example, it is false that `5 =:= 5.0`.
- `=/=`: Exact inequality (value and type).
- `==`: Inexact equality (value). For example, it is true that `5 == 5.0`.
- `/=`: Inexact inequality.

Inequality Operators: `<`, `>`, `=<`, `>=`. Be careful that `=<` is inverted to most languages.

Also, total ordering is guaranteed: `number < atom < reference < fun < port < pid < tuple < list < bit string`.

Note that `booleans` are just atoms, thus it is true that `1 < false`.

#### Tuples

Pattern matching, atoms and tuples can be used together to perform seamless validation:

```
10> PreciseTemperature = {celsius, 23.213}.
{celsius,23.213}
11> {kelvin, T} = PreciseTemperature.
** exception error: no match of right hand side value {celsius,23.213}
```

This pattern (atom followed by data) is called a **Tagged Tuple**

#### Lists

Lists can contain multiple types in them. They are implemented as linked lists.

Strings are just lists of integers, which leads to some confusing representations:

```
2> [97, 98, 99].
"abc"
3> [97,98,99,4,5,6].
[97,98,99,4,5,6]
4> [233].
"é"
```

Use `++` to add lists and `--` to remove from them. Note that removals should be read from right to left:

```
9> [1,2,3] -- [1,2] -- [3].
[3]
10> [1,2,3] -- [1,2] -- [2].
[2,3]
```

Quick explanation about the examples:

1. `[1,2] -- [3]` results in `[1, 2]`, as `[3]` does not exist in the list. `[1,2,3] -- [1,2]` results in `[3]`.
2. `[1,2] -- [2]` results in `[1]`. Then, `[1, 2, 3] -- [1]` results in `[2, 3]`

The list can be split into its head (first element) and tail (the rest) with the syntax:

```
13> List = [2,3,4].
[2,3,4]
14> NewList = [1|List].
[1,2,3,4]
15> [Head|Tail] = NewList.
[1,2,3,4]
16> Head.
1
17> Tail.
[2,3,4]
```

#### List Comprehensions

Very similar to set definitions in mathematical notation. For one variable:

```
NewList = [Expression || Pattern <- List, Condition1, Condition2, ... ConditionN]
```

Or more generally, calling the `Pattern <- List` part of it a _generator expression_:

```
NewList = [Expression || GeneratorExp1, GeneratorExp2, ..., GeneratorExpN,Condition1, Condition2, ... ConditionM]
```

For example:

```
2> [X || X <- [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10], X rem 2 =:= 0].
[2,4,6,8,10]
5> [X+Y || X <- [1,2], Y <- [3,4]].
[4,5,5,6]
```

Note that the generator expression can itself perform the _filtering_ role:

```
6> Weather = [{toronto, rain}, {montreal, storms}, {london, fog},
6>            {paris, sun}, {boston, fog}, {vancouver, snow}].
[{toronto,rain},
{montreal,storms},
{london,fog},
{paris,sun},
{boston,fog},
{vancouver,snow}]
7> FoggyPlaces = [X || {X, fog} <- Weather].
[london,boston]
```

### Working with Binary Data

> Skipped a bit through it, as it's not really relevant for my applications for now.

#### Binary Strings

Unlike normal Lists, Binary Strings are implemented as arrays. They are more space-efficient, but harder to manipulate.

## Modules

### What Are Modules?

Module: functions bundled together into a single file (accessible through a single name).

Built in Functions (BIFs) are accessible without the module name (erlang). Thus, `erlang:f()` is equivalent to `f()`.

Useful modules:

- `lists`: List operations
- `file`: Input/output functions

### Creating Modules

They contain:

- Functions:
- Attributes: module name, author, function headers... Custom attributes can be defined.

Functions can be exported with: `-export([Function1/Arity, Function2/Arity, ..., FunctionN/Arity]).`. Polimorphism (given different arities) is possible.

Comment convention:

- `%%%`: For module information (licenses, etc.) and separating code blocks
- `%%`: For single-line comments
- `%`: For comments at the end of a line

Use `-import` to access functions without the module name, but highly discouraged. Only used in reality for the `lists` module.

### Compiling Code

Compile from the shell with `c(module)`.

There are also some useful compilation flags: `c(hello, [debug_info, export_all]).`:

- `debug_info` adds little overhead and makes debugging way easier. Use is always recommended.
- `export_all` ignores `export` statements and exports all functions in the module. Avoid in production.

There is a couple more, don't seem that important.

### Defining Macros

Similar to C macros.

Defined as: `-define(MACRO, some_value).` Used with `?MACRO`.

Function macros also exist: `-define(sub(X,Y), X-Y).`

Some predefined macros:

- `?MODULE`: Name of the module (as an atom)
- `?FILE`: Filename (as a string)
- `?LINE`: Line in the code where the macro is placed.

Same as in C, one can check if macros are defined:

```
-ifdef(DEBUGMODE).
-define(DEBUG(S), io:format("dbg: "++S)).
-else.
-define(DEBUG(S), ok).
-endif.
```

Macros can be defined in compilation with `c(Module, [{d,'MACRO_NO_VALUE'},{d,'MACRO_WITH_VALUE', 42}]).`.

### More About Macros

The module metadata can be accessed with: `module:module_info().`. Attributes (or any other key, as a matter of fact), are retrieved with: `module:module_info(attributes).`

_VSN_ is an automatically generated version number of the code (used for hot-loading). It can also be configured as any other attribute.

## Syntax in Functions

Pattern matching can be performed at the function parameter level using polymorphism. This is a valid example:

```
greet(male, Name) ->
  io:format("Hello, Mr. ~s!", [Name]);
greet(female, Name) ->
  io:format("Hello, Mrs. ~s!", [Name]);
greet(_, Name) ->
  io:format("Hello, ~s!", [Name]).
```

Technically, these are not different functions but _function clauses_ of the same _function declaration_. Note the `;` instead of the `.` between clauses.

> The book contains some more advanced examples.

### Guards! Guards!

Additional conditions to the function parameters can be added using Guards. These two examples are equivalent:

```
right_age(X) when X >= 16, X =< 104 ->
  true;
right_age(_) ->
  false.
```

```
wrong_age(X) when X < 16; X > 104 ->
  true;
wrong_age(_) ->
  false.
```

The `,` and `;` behave mostly like `andalso` and `orelse` respectively. The difference is that in the case of `,` and `;` the second part will also evaluate in case the first throws an exception.

Both methods can be combined on using guards, but `,` and `;` cannot be nested.

### What the If?!

**Very different from IFs in other languages!!**. In fact, they are called _guard patterns_.

All statements must return _something_. If clauses are not exception, so a _catch-all_ must always be defined:

```
oh_god(N) ->
  if N =:= 2 -> might_succeed;
  true -> always_does  %% this is Erlang's if's 'else!'
end.
```

It may be declared without the `true` if that is impossible. However, if no of the clauses match, an exception will be through?

Motivation behind using `true` instead of `else` [here](http://erlang.org/pipermail/erlang-questions/2009-January/041228.html).

### In Case... Of

Case statements combine the power of _pattern matching_ and _guards_ inside the function body:

```
beach(Temperature) ->
  case Temperature of
    {celsius, N} when N >= 20, N =< 45 ->
      'favorable';
    {kelvin, N} when N >= 293, N =< 318 ->
      'scientifically favorable';
    {fahrenheit, N} when N >= 68, N =< 113 ->
      'favorable in the US';
    _ ->
      'avoid beach'
end.
```

### Which One Should We Use?

Function clauses and case statements compile to nearly identical bytecode.

Ifs offer a shortcut to guards without the pattern matching part.

Choose the cleaner on a case-by-case (pun intended) basis.

## Types (or Lack Thereof)

Quote:

_To put it simply, while most languages and type systems aim to allow error-free programs, Erlang assumes that errors will happen and includes features that make those errors easier to handle smoothly and without unnecessary downtime. _

Typing in Erlang:

- Dynamic: Types not specified in code.
- Strong: No automatic conversion between types.

### Type Conversion

Whole list:

```
atom_to_binary/2, atom_to_list/1, binary_to_atom/2, binary_to_existing_atom/2, binary_to_list/1, bitstring_to_list/1, binary_to_term/1, float_to_list/1, fun_to_list/1, integer_to_list/1, integer_to_list/2, iolist_to_binary/1, iolist_to_atom/1, list_to_atom/1, list_to_binary/1, list_to_bitstring/1, list_to_existing_atom/1, list_to_float/1, list_to_integer/2, list_to_pid/1, list_to_tuple/1, pid_to_list/1, port_to_list/1, ref_to_list/1, term_to_binary/1, term_to_binary/2 and tuple_to_list/1.
```

### To Guard a Data Type

Available type checking functions:

```
is_atom/1           is_binary/1
is_bitstring/1      is_boolean/1        is_builtin/3
is_float/1          is_function/1       is_function/2
is_integer/1        is_list/1           is_number/1
is_pid/1            is_port/1           is_record/2
is_record/3         is_reference/1      is_tuple/1
```

### For Type Junkies

_Dialyser_ can be used. See Chapter 30.

## Hello Recursion!

Erlang does not have any looping behavior other than recursion.

### Length of a Tail Recursion

In the simple implementation of some recursive example, the return calculation is accumulated and computed in the end. This approach results in increase memory usage because of the "carrying part".

This is solved using "Tail Recursion", which consists of adding extra function parameters and perform the carrying calculation in them.

Compare the two implementations:

```
fac(0) -> 1;
fac(N) when N > 0 -> N*fac(N-1).
```

```
tail_fac(N) -> tail_fac(N,1).

tail_fac(0,Acc) -> Acc;
tail_fac(N,Acc) when N > 0 -> tail_fac(N-1,N*Acc).
```

Only the function `fac/1` would be exported, resulting in the same interface.

## Higher-Order Functions

### Let's Get Functional

Declaration syntax:

```
map(_, []) -> [];
map(F, [H|T]) -> [F(H)|map(F,T)].

incr(X) -> X + 1.
decr(X) -> X - 1.
```

Calling syntax:

```
1> c(hhfuns).
{ok, hhfuns}
2> L = [1,2,3,4,5].
[1,2,3,4,5]
5> hhfuns:map(fun hhfuns:incr/1, L).
[2,3,4,5,6]
6> hhfuns:map(fun hhfuns:decr/1, L).
[0,1,2,3,4]
```

### Anonymous Functions

Same example as before:

```
9> hhfuns:map(fun(X) -> X + 1 end, L).
[2,3,4,5,6]
10> hhfuns:map(fun(X) -> X - 1 end, L).
[0,1,2,3,4]
```

### More Abstractions

Standard library: `lists:map/2`, `lists:filter/2`, `lists:foldl/3`, `lists:foldr/3`, `lists:all/2`, and `lists:any/2`.

Drop (or keep) all elements up to a true predicate: `dropwhile/2`, `takewhile/2`. Also `partition/2`.

Many more in the lists module.

## Errors and Exceptions

Erlang merges two big paradigms: _functional_ and _concurrent_. So far, only seen the functional part of it.

### A Compilation of Errors

> Most of them, pretty intuitive. Keep as [reference](https://learnyousomeerlang.com/errors-and-exceptions).

### Raising Exceptions

Syntax: `erlang:error(Reason)`, where `Reason` is an atom. The built-in errors use some particular atoms.

Use `error/1` when the process is _unintentionally_ dying. Full stacktrace is sent. Use `exit/1` instead when the process is dying on purpose. No stacktrace is sent

`throw/1` does not generate an error unless caught. Use them as part of the interface to outside the module for unsupported cases.

### Dealing with Exceptions

#### Handling Different Types of Exceptions

A complete example catching all exceptions:

```
talk() -> "blah blah".
sword(1) -> throw(slice);
sword(2) -> erlang:error(cut_arm);
sword(3) -> exit(cut_leg);
sword(4) -> throw(punch);
sword(5) -> exit(cross_bridge).

black_knight(Attack) when is_function(Attack, 0) ->
    try Attack() of
        _ -> "None shall pass."
    catch
        throw:slice -> "It is but a scratch.";
        error:cut_arm -> "I've had worse.";
        exit:cut_leg -> "Come on you pansy!";
        _:_ -> "Just a flesh wound."
    end.
```

Which is executed as follows:

```
7> c(exceptions).
{ok,exceptions}
8> exceptions:talk().
"blah blah"
9> exceptions:black_knight(fun exceptions:talk/0).
"None shall pass."
10> exceptions:black_knight(fun() -> exceptions:sword(1) end).
"It is but a scratch."
11> exceptions:black_knight(fun() -> exceptions:sword(2) end).
"I've had worse."
12> exceptions:black_knight(fun() -> exceptions:sword(3) end).
"Come on you pansy!"
13> exceptions:black_knight(fun() -> exceptions:sword(4) end).
"Just a flesh wound."
14> exceptions:black_knight(fun() -> exceptions:sword(5) end).
"Just a flesh wound."
```

#### After the Catch

The `after` block is always run:

```
try Expr of
    Pattern -> Expr1
catch
    Type:Exception -> Expr2
after % this always gets executed
    Expr3
end
```

The return value in the `after` block is ignored. The objective is to run function with side-effects (i.e. closing a file).

#### Trying Multiple Expressions

The part between `try` and `of` can have multiple expressions (with `,`, obviously). The part between `of` and `catch` can be dropped.

Try blocks can ruin tail recursion. Read the warning for more details!

#### Wait, There's More!

The keyword `catch` by itself is another way to perform error-handling. It uses format:

- `throw`: Just returns the atom
- `exit`: Returns `{"EXIT", ATOM}`
- `error: Same as `exit`, but also including the stacktrace in a list.

The stacktrace can also be retrieved with `erlang:get_stacktrace/0`.

This additional wrapping/unwrapping can be problematic, better to use `try...catch` instead.

## Try a Try in a Tree

Idea of using throws not for errors, but as "non-local returns" with optimization goals in mind.
